all right in uh chapter three
we discuss the uh crystalline solids uh
the regular arrangement
and packing of atoms into a crystal
structure
and when we we spoke of this we didn't
speak about defects yet
each location within the structure had
an atom
and this crystalline solid was
considered infinite in size
so we're going to do now is we're going
to go ahead and consider the types of
defects or
or imperfections that would exist in
crystalline solids
now one of the reasons why we're
interested in this is because the
defects
often dominate the properties of a solid
and equally as important through
processing techniques that we'll see
later
in this textbook uh processing
techniques can change the number and
types of defects
and since they can change the change the
number and types of defects
that is their structure these defects
can control our older properties we now
have a
direct way through processing to affect
the properties of materials right so
there's
three sort of classes or levels
of imperfections that we can talk about
there's the one-dimensional
two-dimensional
three-dimensional in terms of their
extent
referred to in your text is point
defects
line defects and interfacial or surface
type
defects okay so we'll go through each of
these types
in order so we'll go ahead and take a
look at the
point defects the vacancy and the
interstitial
will be kind of the two main categories
and then we'll take a look at a few
others
but here on the left side we've got a
a slice through a crystal structure
looking at a plane maybe this looks like
the one zero zero for the face centered
cubic
so you can see the face
right here for the fcc structure
and now we can see that there's a
missing atom
so missing atoms are simply referred to
as vacancies
in the structure and we could also have
the case where maybe an
atom exists where it shouldn't
so it's in between atoms like this one
here
this is referred to as an interstitial
these
sites between the atoms are referred to
as interstitial sites
this one specifically is a
self-interstitial
because it's an atom of the same type
so we could also talk about impurity
interstitials
which would be an atom of a different
type into this lattice
all right so one thing you can see about
a self interstitial
is that it's not going to fit right so
the way this is drawn there's
these atoms are all overlapping so this
lattice would have to stretch out and
distort
in order to fit this atom right in here
in this site so this is not going to be
as common
as say a vacancy
the vacancies are one of the defects
that are actually thermodynamically
stable
so we can't get rid of them in fact
their number
there's an equilibrium number of them
that depends on the temperature
of the solid and as we approach the
melting point
this number of vacancies increases
exponentially so you'll have a problem
in your homework take a look at the
number of vacancies in a solid
i'll just refer you to problem 4.1 in
your textbook which will run through a
simple problem using this equation
but let's take a look at the equation
for a second this is called an arrhenius
equation
okay anytime you see an equation of this
form we've got an
exponential of some kind of an energy
barrier
over kt that's
thermal energy is boltzmann's constant
and this is the temperature
in kelvin so this is like a probability
that we can overcome this
formation energy or this barrier you've
seen this before in chemical kinetics
where this was the energy for a reaction
to overcome the barrier
okay so this is like a probability that
a given site
could be a vacancy and then this is the
number of sites
that are in our given structure say per
meter cubed
and then that will give us the number of
vacancies
in that same volume say meter cubed
so many times we'll just move this and
over here and we'll look at simply the
vacancy fraction so the number of
vacancies
per atom site in a given material
vacancy fraction
all right uh let's see what else can we
say
the um this activation energy q
we're going to see is on the order of an
electron volt so that's a convenient
unit to use
so you're going to need to use
boltzmann's constant
also in units of electron volts
all right point defects in the metal or
alloy
continued here so we've seen the
self-interstitial
and we've seen the vacancy the missing
atom case
we can also talk about these um
defects when we also have alloys so
let's say we had a
an alloy here maybe a nickel so we have
this crystal structure here
uh nickel this is a face centered cubic
material
so this represents maybe one one one
plane
and then we're substituting in copper
in place of some of the nickel in this
lattice okay these atomic sites
so this is a substitutional impurity
okay i'm removing the host atom i'm
substituting in a different type so it's
substitutional impurity
and this alloy is referred to as a
substitutional solid solution
now we could also take a
an alloy a smaller atom
into a host and have it locate at
interstitial sites
as referred to as an interstitial
impurity a good example of this one
would be carbon
in iron forming a steel so we'd have a
steel structure
the iron the host and then the carbon
would sit
in the interstitial sites now in this
picture it makes it look like it sits
perfectly in here in fact the carbon is
a little bit big
and so it does distort the lattice
increases the energy of that system and
so we'll see that we can't put
a whole lot of carbon into the iron
because of this
if you try and push in too much then
the carbon will precipitate out
of this lattice and form an iron carbide
all right so what we want to do is to go
ahead and see if we can calculate with
our knowledge of crystal structures
what the size of these interstitial
sites might be
so we're going to take a look at the
types of interstitial sites we have
and then see if we can't calculate their
size
so i'm just going to define two types in
the face-centered cubic structure your
book
will describe for you the body centered
cubic structure
so if we take a look at the face
centered cubic structure so
these atoms here in blue and i've
highlighted a few of them here and
talk about that in a second but the blue
are in
face-centered cubic positions okay you
can see the
centers here faces containing the blue
atoms
and then they've got a couple of other
atoms and purity atoms that are located
in between sites so there's one that's
directly in the middle
and i'll talk about that one in just a
second over here
we've got one sitting on this edge okay
so that represents a type of site
that could be any of the edges and we've
got one that's sitting here
that we've seen before in the diamond
cubic structure in the zinc blend
structure
that's sitting off of this atom by a
quarter quarter quarter in terms of its
location
this one is the one that's is in a
tetrahedral site
so if i take this corner atom and the
three faces they bring faces
we will find that these three form a
triangle they're all touching
and this one's sitting on top of them
also touching and so here's our picture
so if you want this atom is
this one here this is our little
tetrahedral atom sitting in the
in the middle in this tetrahedral site
and then we've got
these other three atoms
forming this base of this pyramid
and so we want to find out what the size
of this
atom is that just fits in this little
tetrahedral site
okay the one in the center if i look
over here
there's a big hole in the face centered
cubic
structure right in the center of the
body you have to position one half one
half one half
and the if i take the neighboring six
face atoms those are actually all
touching you can see that down here
and then there's the site right in the
middle and this is referred to as an
octahedron
i connect all these sides you can see
here this forms
an octahedron so this is an octahedral
site
all right and a similar kind of site
here for the edges
if we were to put on the rest of the
blue lattice we'd actually see that this
is similar
and again it forms an octahedral
site so for homework
uh you're going to have to work on this
one the octahedral site
i'm going to go ahead and show you how
to do this tetrahedral
one so you can use the same method
for the octahedral all right so
we could use a lot of geometry if we
wanted and figure out the size of the
spacing in here
but i'm going to try and show you just a
simpler way just using
distance between points this is
essentially related to a dot product
what i'm going to do is i'm going to go
ahead
and take this tetrahedral atom
which is located at
one quarter three quarters
one quarter okay you can see that's
given
here in the problem and i need one more
atom
that's touching it so i'm just going to
go ahead and take this
corner one here this is easy for us to
get a
coordinate from so that's 0 1
0. all right so let's go ahead
and subtract these two
so that'll form the
vector connecting these two points
so that would be one quarter uh
three quarters minus one is minus
quarter
quarter all right
and the magnitude of that so that'll be
now the distance between
the tetrahedral atom and the corner atom
is going to be square root of three
over four
so let me go ahead and we'll grab these
two atoms and see what we just did
so we've got that one i've got this big
one they're touching
this is little r
and the center here is big r
and so
um what i do know is that the distance
between these
now is square root 3
r but i have to remember that i need to
multiply by
a because this work up here was done
relative to the edge length of our unit
cell this is just fractional
but if i want to actually start putting
the size of atoms
into this structure then i want to use
the real dimension so i'm going to
multiply by
a the length here
so i can get real coordinates so what i
have then is little r plus big r here is
equal to the square root of 3
over 4 times a
and you'll recall that for the face
centered
system i hope that the edge length
a is given by four times
the radius of the host here
over the square root of two
all right so if we just go ahead and
rearrange
i'm going to get r
little r over r is equal to
the square root of 3 over
the square root of 2 minus
1.
and put that in my calculator and i get
0.225
okay so what does that mean so if i have
the radius of my host let's say
that it's iron i can go ahead and put
the
radius of iron in here
and approximately two tenths
of that iron radius would be the radius
the maximum radius of my interstitial
that would just fit into this
tetrahedral site without needing any
extra room
okay now it's not the maximum size of a
of an
interstitial atom that can fit
in in well i say real life
because you can fit bigger ones in there
they'll just distort the lattice
but by distorting the lattice i won't be
able to
put as many into the overall structure
if they are small enough to just fit
inside the interstitials without
stretching the lattice
then i can get a lot more of them into
the structure
but this is the size of this hole that
is
in the structure and what you're going
to have for homework to do would be this
one
this is going to be much bigger in size
you'll you'll see
and again you can use the same kind of
method you're given the
the coordinates for the center atom here
and all you need is just one of these
face atoms because they're all touching
and you go through the same
type of procedure okay
that's all i have for now we'll continue
on to the
next video in this chapter